data/README.md, before:

# IQB Static Data Files

This directory contains static reference data used by the IQB prototype.

## Current Dataset

**Period**: October 2024 and October 2025

**Source**: [M-Lab NDT](https://www.measurementlab.net/tests/ndt/) unified views

**Countries**: All available countries

## Data Formats

We maintain two data formats in `./cache/`:

### v0 - JSON Format (Golden Files)

Per-country JSON files with pre-aggregated percentiles:

- **Location**: `./cache/v0/{country}_{year}_{month}.json`
- **Example**: `us_2024_10.json` (~31M download samples, ~24M upload samples)
- **Structure**: Simple JSON with percentiles (p1, p5, p10, p25, p50, p75, p90, p95, p99)
- **Use case**: Casual data processing, backward compatibility, quick inspection

```json
{
  "metrics": {
    "download_throughput_mbps": {"p1": 0.38, "p99": 891.82},
    "upload_throughput_mbps": {"p1": 0.06, "p99": 813.73},
    "latency_ms": {"p1": 0.16, "p99": 254.34},
    "packet_loss": {"p1": 0.0, "p99": 0.25}
  }
}
```

### v1 - Parquet Format (Current)

Raw query results stored efficiently for flexible analysis:

- **Location**: `./cache/v1/{start_date}/{end_date}/{query_type}/`
- **Files**:
  - `data.parquet` - Query results (~1-60 MiB, streamable, chunked row groups)
  - `stats.json` - Query metadata (start time, duration, bytes processed/billed, template hash)
- **Use case**: Efficient filtering, large-scale analysis, direct PyArrow/Pandas processing

**Migration**: The [../library](../library) `IQBCache` uses v1. We are keeping v0 data
around as golden files, for backward compatibility, and casual use.

## GitHub Cache Synchronization (Interim Solution)

**IMPORTANT**: This is a throwaway interim solution that will be replaced by GCS.

Since the v1 Parquet files can be large (~1-60 MiB) and we have BigQuery quota
constraints, we use GitHub releases to distribute pre-generated cache files.

### For Data Scientists (Manual Workflow)

Sync cached files from GitHub before analysis:

```bash
cd data/
./ghcache.py sync
```

This downloads any missing cache files listed in `ghcache.json` and verifies SHA256.

### For Pipeline Users (Automatic)

The `generate_data.py` script automatically syncs cached files before running queries,
so you don't need to run `ghcache.py` manually.

### For Maintainers (Publishing New Cache)

When you generate new cache files locally:

```bash
cd data/
./ghcache.py scan
```

This:
1. Scans `cache/v1/` for git-ignored files
2. Computes SHA256 hashes
3. Copies files to `data/` with mangled names (ready for upload)
4. Updates `ghcache.json` manifest

Then manually:
1. Upload mangled files to GitHub release (e.g., v0.1.0)
2. Commit updated `ghcache.json` to repository

**Note**: This system assumes Unix paths and won't work on Windows.

## How This Data Was Generated

### BigQuery Queries

The data was extracted from M-Lab's public BigQuery tables using queries
inside the [../library/src/iqb/queries](../library/src/iqb/queries) package.

### Running the Data Generation Pipeline

**Prerequisites**:

- Google Cloud SDK (`gcloud`) installed

- BigQuery CLI (`bq`) installed

- `gcloud`-authenticated with an account subscribed to
[M-Lab Discuss mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/measurementlab.net/g/discuss)

- Python 3.13 using `uv` as documented in the toplevel [README.md](../README.md)

**Complete Pipeline** (recommended):

```bash
cd data/
uv run python generate_data.py
```

This orchestrates the complete pipeline:

1. Queries BigQuery for download metrics (throughput, latency, packet loss)

2. Queries BigQuery for upload metrics (throughput)

3. Merges the data into per-country JSON files

Generated files: v0 JSON files `${country}_2024_10.json` and `${country}_2025_10.json`
inside [./cache/v0](./cache/v0), plus v1 Parquet cache with query metadata.

**Individual Pipeline Stages** (for debugging):

```bash
cd data/

# Stage 1a: Query downloads
uv run python run_query.py downloads_by_country \
  --start-date 2024-10-01 --end-date 2024-11-01 \
  -o downloads.json

# Stage 1b: Query uploads
uv run python run_query.py uploads_by_country \
  --start-date 2024-10-01 --end-date 2024-11-01 \
  -o uploads.json

# Stage 2: Merge data
uv run python merge_data.py
```

**Pipeline Scripts**:

- [generate_data.py](generate_data.py) - Orchestrates the complete pipeline

- [run_query.py](run_query.py) - Executes BigQuery queries using IQBPipeline,
saves v1 cache (parquet + stats) and v0 JSON output

- [merge_data.py](merge_data.py) - Merges download and upload data into
per-country v0 files

## Notes

- **Static data**: These files contain pre-aggregated percentiles
for Phase 1 prototype. Phase 2 will add dynamic data fetching.

- **Data formats**: v0 JSON files (~1.4KB) for quick analysis;
v1 Parquet files (~1-60 MiB) with stats.json for efficient processing and cost tracking.

- **Time granularity**: Data is aggregated over the entire
months of October 2024 and October 2025. The analyst decides which
time window to use for running IQB calculations.

- **Percentile selection**: The Streamlit UI allows users
to select which percentile(s) to use for IQB score calculations.

- **File size**: Each per-country JSON file is ~1.4KB (uncompressed). No
compression needed. For more fine grained queries, the Parquet files
allow for more efficient storage and data processing.

## M-Lab NDT Data Schema

M-Lab provides two unified views:

- `measurement-lab.ndt.unified_downloads` - Download tests

- `measurement-lab.ndt.unified_uploads` - Upload tests

Key fields used:

- `a.MeanThroughputMbps` - Mean throughput in Mbps

- `a.MinRTT` - Minimum round-trip time in milliseconds

- `a.LossRate` - Packet loss rate (0.0-1.0)

- `client.Geo.CountryCode` - ISO country code

- `date` - Measurement date (YYYY-MM-DD)

See [M-Lab NDT documentation](https://www.measurementlab.net/tests/ndt/#ndt-data-in-bigquery)
for details.

## Future Improvements (Phase 2+)

- Finer geographic resolution (cities, provinces, ASNs) - IN PROGRESS
- Replace GitHub releases with GCS buckets for cache distribution
- Additional datasets (Ookla, Cloudflare)
- Finer time granularity (daily, weekly)

Commit message:

feat(data): add `by_country_city` data (#77)
This diff extends the `iqb.queries` package to support querying by
country and city and modifies the pipeline to use those new queries to
fetch data. We also publish the data at the v0.1.0 GitHub release and
arrange for `ghcache.py` to fetch this data.

While there, start simplifying the data fetching pipeline to stop
generating `cache/v0` data, which we will keep around for now as golden
files, and refactor the fetching code to use a loop, rather than rolling
out individual commands.

Also, update the docs accordingly.

While there, address unused-variables-warning in `data/ghcache.py`.

While there, reap `data/merge_data.py`, which is unused after we stopped
updating `cache/v0`.

data/README.md, after:

# IQB Static Data Files

This directory contains static reference data used by the IQB prototype.

## Current Dataset

**Period**: October 2024 and October 2025

**Source**: [M-Lab NDT](https://www.measurementlab.net/tests/ndt/) unified views

**Countries**: All available countries

## Data Formats

We maintain two data formats in `./cache/`:

### v0 - JSON Format (Deprecated - Golden Files Only)

**IMPORTANT**: The v0 cache is no longer actively updated. Files in `./cache/v0/` are
kept as golden files for testing and backward compatibility only.

Per-country JSON files with pre-aggregated percentiles:

- **Location**: `./cache/v0/{country}_{year}_{month}.json`
- **Example**: `us_2024_10.json` (~31M download samples, ~24M upload samples)
- **Structure**: Simple JSON with percentiles (p1, p5, p10, p25, p50, p75, p90, p95, p99)
- **Use case**: Golden files for testing, backward compatibility

```json
{
  "metrics": {
    "download_throughput_mbps": {"p1": 0.38, "p99": 891.82},
    "upload_throughput_mbps": {"p1": 0.06, "p99": 813.73},
    "latency_ms": {"p1": 0.16, "p99": 254.34},
    "packet_loss": {"p1": 0.0, "p99": 0.25}
  }
}
```

### v1 - Parquet Format (Current)

Raw query results stored efficiently for flexible analysis:

- **Location**: `./cache/v1/{start_date}/{end_date}/{query_type}/`
- **Files**:
  - `data.parquet` - Query results (~1-60 MiB, streamable, chunked row groups)
  - `stats.json` - Query metadata (start time, duration, bytes processed/billed, template hash)
- **Use case**: Efficient filtering, large-scale analysis, direct PyArrow/Pandas processing

**Current format**: The [../library](../library) `IQBCache` uses v1 exclusively.

## GitHub Cache Synchronization (Interim Solution)

**IMPORTANT**: This is a throwaway interim solution that will be replaced by GCS.

Since the v1 Parquet files can be large (~1-60 MiB) and we have BigQuery quota
constraints, we use GitHub releases to distribute pre-generated cache files.

### For Data Scientists (Manual Workflow)

Sync cached files from GitHub before analysis:

```bash
cd data/
./ghcache.py sync
```

This downloads any missing cache files listed in `ghcache.json` and verifies SHA256.

### For Pipeline Users (Automatic)

The `generate_data.py` script automatically syncs cached files before running queries,
so you don't need to run `ghcache.py` manually.

### For Maintainers (Publishing New Cache)

When you generate new cache files locally:

```bash
cd data/
./ghcache.py scan
```

This:
1. Scans `cache/v1/` for git-ignored files
2. Computes SHA256 hashes
3. Copies files to `data/` with mangled names (ready for upload)
4. Updates `ghcache.json` manifest

Then manually:
1. Upload mangled files to GitHub release (e.g., v0.1.0)
2. Commit updated `ghcache.json` to repository

**Note**: This system assumes Unix paths and won't work on Windows.

## How This Data Was Generated

### BigQuery Queries

The data was extracted from M-Lab's public BigQuery tables using queries
inside the [../library/src/iqb/queries](../library/src/iqb/queries) package.

### Running the Data Generation Pipeline

**Prerequisites**:

- Google Cloud SDK (`gcloud`) installed

- BigQuery CLI (`bq`) installed

- `gcloud`-authenticated with an account subscribed to
[M-Lab Discuss mailing list](https://groups.google.com/a/measurementlab.net/g/discuss)

- Python 3.13 using `uv` as documented in the toplevel [README.md](../README.md)

**Complete Pipeline** (recommended):

```bash
cd data/
uv run python generate_data.py
```

This orchestrates the complete pipeline:

1. Queries BigQuery for multiple datasets (country, country_asn, country_city, country_city_asn)

2. Queries both download and upload metrics for each dataset

3. Saves results to v1 Parquet cache with query metadata

Generated files: v1 Parquet files in `./cache/v1/` with query metadata.

**Individual Pipeline Stages** (for debugging):

```bash
cd data/

# Query specific dataset
uv run python run_query.py downloads_by_country \
  --start-date 2024-10-01 --end-date 2024-11-01 \
  -o cache/v0/downloads_by_country.json

# Query another dataset
uv run python run_query.py uploads_by_country_asn \
  --start-date 2024-10-01 --end-date 2024-11-01 \
  -o cache/v0/uploads_by_country_asn.json
```

**Pipeline Scripts**:

- [generate_data.py](generate_data.py) - Orchestrates the complete pipeline

- [run_query.py](run_query.py) - Executes BigQuery queries using IQBPipeline,
saves v1 cache (parquet + stats) and optional JSON output

## Notes

- **Cache format**: v1 Parquet files (~1-60 MiB) with stats.json for efficient
processing and cost tracking. v0 JSON files are deprecated and kept only as golden files.

- **Time granularity**: Data is aggregated over the entire
months of October 2024 and October 2025. The analyst decides which
time window to use for running IQB calculations.

- **Percentile selection**: The Streamlit UI allows users
to select which percentile(s) to use for IQB score calculations.

- **Query results**: Raw query results are stored in Parquet format for efficient
filtering and analysis. Use the [../library](../library) `IQBCache` to access them.

## M-Lab NDT Data Schema

M-Lab provides two unified views:

- `measurement-lab.ndt.unified_downloads` - Download tests

- `measurement-lab.ndt.unified_uploads` - Upload tests

Key fields used:

- `a.MeanThroughputMbps` - Mean throughput in Mbps

- `a.MinRTT` - Minimum round-trip time in milliseconds

- `a.LossRate` - Packet loss rate (0.0-1.0)

- `client.Geo.CountryCode` - ISO country code

- `date` - Measurement date (YYYY-MM-DD)

See [M-Lab NDT documentation](https://www.measurementlab.net/tests/ndt/#ndt-data-in-bigquery)
for details.

## Future Improvements (Phase 2+)

- Finer geographic resolution (cities, provinces, ASNs) - IN PROGRESS
- Replace GitHub releases with GCS buckets for cache distribution
- Additional datasets (Ookla, Cloudflare)
- Finer time granularity (daily, weekly)
